WINC-939: Windows Node Global Egress Proxy Support (#1360)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/windows-containers/windows-node-egress-proxy.md

sure the addition of the egress proxy feature does not break existing functionality. If we release a community offering
with this feature, we will need to add a CI job using a cluster-wide proxy on OKD.

### Open Questions

> 1. Is testing cluster-wide proxy in CI on __only AWS__ okay? This is consistent with what the Linux side does.
     QE may want to cover all platforms though.
> 2. Can we use the existing [CI proxy job](https://github.com/openshift/release/tree/master/ci-operator/step-registry/ipi/conf/aws/proxy)
     to test an HTTPS proxy that requires custom certs to access, or can we only test HTTP and no-proxy using it? If the
     latter, we'll need to explore how to do this in EC2 and add improvements to the linked workflow.
> 3. Do user-created Windows workloads need proxy config set in their spec? Does this already happen for Linux
     counterparts? e.g. setting proxy env vars and mounting the trustedCA ConfigMap as a volume to the deployment spec
     Regardless, I don't think this should be WMCO's responsibility, so is this on another team or upon the user?
  <!-- TODO: update non-goals based on the answer to number 3  -->

> ### Graduation Criteria

Reviewer: We really don't have a graduation criteria per se. We are going directly to GA.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

A community version of WMCO 8 or 9 can be released with incremental additions to Windows proxy support
functionality, giving users an opportunity to get an early preview of the feature using OKD/OCP 4.13 or 4.14.

> It will also allow us to collect feedback to troubleshoot common pain points and learn if there are any shortcomings.

Reviewer: How is this `Dev Preview --> Tech Preview`?

> #### Tech Preview -> GA

Reviewer: I would remove this sub-heading and just having `Graduation criteria` where you capture all of this.

The feature associated with this enhacement is targeted to land in the offical Red Hat operator version of WMCO 9.0.0
within OpenShift 4.14 timeframe. The normal WMCO release process will be followed as the functionality described in this
enhancement is integrated into the product.

An Openshift docs update announcing Windows cluster-wide proxy support will be required as part of GA. The new docs
should list any Windows-specific info, but linking to existing docs should be enough for overarching proxy/PKI details.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A, as this is a new feature that does not supercede an existing one

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

The relevant upgrade path is from WMCO 8.y.z in OCP 4.13 to WMCO 9.y.z in OCP 4.14. There will be no changes to the
current WMCO upgrade strategy. Once customers are on WMCO 9.0.0:

> * if they have an existing cluster-wide proxy configured, their Windows nodes will begin utilizing it for egress traffic

Reviewer: This implies we are supporting this upgrade path i.e. a cluster with proxy enabled running WCMO in an unsupported configuration being upgraded. Do we want to do that?

* otherwise, they can configure one and the Windows nodes will be automatically updated to use it by the operator

When deconfiguring Windows instances, proxy settings will be cleared from the node. This involves undoing some node
config steps i.e. unsetting proxy variables and deleting additional certificates from the machine's local trust store.
This scenario will occur when upgrading both BYOH and Machine-backed Windows nodes.

> In both relevant OCP versions, OLM consumes global proxy settings and injects them into managed operators like WMCO.

Reviewer: This implies we are supporting proxy in 8.y.z and 9.0.0 which is not the case.

Downgrades are generally [not supported by OLM](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/issues/1177),
which manages WMCO. In case of breaking changes, please see the
[WMCO Upgrades](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/windows-containers/windows-machine-config-operator-upgrades.md#risks-and-mitigations)
enhancement document for guidance.

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A. There will be no version skew since this work is all within 1 product subcomponent (WMCO). The 8.y.z version of the
official Red Hat operator will not have cluster-wide egress proxy support for Windows enabled. Then, when customers move
to WMCO 9.0.0, the proxy support will be available.

## Implementation History

The implementation history can be tracked by following the associated work items in Jira and source code improvements in
the WMCO Github repo.

> Planned GA of the feature: WMCO v9.0.0 in OCP 4.14

Reviewer: This can be removed given from here as it is called out in `Graduation criteria`.

---
title: windows-node-cluster-wide-egress-proxy
authors:
  - "@saifshaikh48"
reviewers:
  - "@openshift/openshift-team-windows-containers"
  - "@openshift/openshift-team-network-edge, for general approach to proxy config consumption, motivation, risks, and testing"
approvers:
  - "@aravindhp"
api-approvers:
  - None
creation-date: 2023-02-16

> last-updated: 2023-03-06

Reviewer: You don't need to update for each review request. I think this should match for the first version. `last-updated` will change on future updates.

---
title: windows-node-cluster-wide-egress-proxy
authors:
  - "@saifshaikh48"
reviewers: # Include a comment about what domain expertise a reviewer is expected to bring and what area of the enhancement you expect them to focus on. For example: - "@networkguru, for networking aspects, please look at IP bootstrapping aspect"
  - "@openshift/openshift-team-windows-containers"

>   - TBD -- sdn?

Reviewer: Meant to say this before. If we do need other reviews it would be the @openshift/openshift-team-network-edge

There are 3 different workflows that affect the cluster-wide proxy use case.
1. A cluster creator specifies global proxy settings at install time
2. A cluster administrator introduces new global proxy settings during runtime in a proxy-less cluster
3. A cluster administrator changes or removes existing global proxy settings during cluster runtime

The first scenario would occur through their [install-config.yaml](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/networking/configuring-a-custom-pki.html#installation-configure-proxy_configuring-a-custom-pki).
The latter 2 scenarios occur through changing the [`Proxy` object named `cluster`](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/networking/enable-cluster-wide-proxy.html#nw-proxy-configure-object_config-cluster-wide-proxy)
or by modifying certificates present in their [trustedCA ConfigMap](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/security/certificates/updating-ca-bundle.html#ca-bundle-replacing_updating-ca-bundle).

In each case, Windows nodes can be joined to the cluster after altering proxy settings in which case proxy settings would

> be applied initial during node configuration. In the latter 2 scenarios, Windows nodes may already be existing on the

Reviewer 2: Did you mean applied initially?

Author: typo, I'll reword

Only the WMCO will be extended which is an optional operator with its own lifecycle and SLO/SLAs, a 
[tier 3 OpenShift API](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/rest_api/understanding-api-support-tiers.html#api-tiers_understanding-api-tiers).

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A

#### Failure Modes & Support Procedures

In general the support procedures for WMCO will remain the same. There are two underlying mechanisms we rely on, the
publishing of proxy config to cluster resources and the comsuming of the published config. If either of the underlying
mechanisms fail, Windows nodes will become proxy unaware. This could involve an issue with the user-provided proxy
settings, the cluster network operator, OLM, or WMCO. This would result in all future egress traffic circumventing the
proxy, which could affect inter-pod communication, existing application availablity, and security. Also, the pause image
may not be able to be fetched, preventing new Windows nodes from being bootstrapped. This would require manual
intervention from the cluster admin or a new release fixing whatever bug is causing the problem.

## Design Details

> 

Reviewer 2: I see 'configuring the proxy settings in WMCO-managed components on Windows nodes (kubelet, containerd runtime)'  in the goals section, but I think we are missing it in the implementation. Can we add more detail here on what role WMCO plays in that?

Author: Basically there are 3 layers to the env vars: Machine, User, Process
- Env vars in the `User` layer inherit from `Machine` layer
- `Process` layer (e.g. Powershell.exe) inherits from both `Machine` and `User`
- Any subprocesses (containerd.exe etc) inherit from their parent process (powershell.exe)

So when we set the vars on the instance (`Machine` scope), the Windows services inherit them. I tried to explain with the `Windows services read environment from the system registry` line but I'll make this more explicit.

Author: I moved this stuff to the alternatives section and called it out there

the `proxy.env` file. This could be an expensive operation, but since we already parse ignition from the `MachineConfig`
as part of node bootstrap, the technical cost and complexity is reduced.

Then, once it has the required values, the operator will set the 3 proxy environment variables on the Windows instance
during node configuration/reconciling through Powershell. Since Windows services read environment from the system 
registry and the registry does not update until a shutdown/startup cycle, this will require rebooting the instance.
```powershell
$Env:<variable-name> = "<new-value>"
```
We may have to separately enable [Powershell to use the proxy vars](https://martin.hoppenheit.info/blog/2015/using-powershell-behind-proxy/).

### Configuring Custom Trusted Certificates

1. Add the trusted CA injection request ConfigMap to WMCO's manifests directory. 
   This is a resource that will be updated by CNO based on the content of the global `Proxy` resource.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  annotations:
    release.openshift.io/create-only: "true"
  labels:
    config.openshift.io/inject-trusted-cabundle: "true"
  name: trusted-ca

>   namespace: openshift-windows-machine-config-operator

Reviewer 2: Would this procedure be same for the third scenario mentioned above 'modifying certificates present in their trustedCA ConfigMap'?
For my understanding, from where do we get the trusted injection request for an updated certificate, is that also from OLM?

Author: Yes it'd be the same procedure. [CNO injects the updated certs into this configmap](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/operators/admin/olm-configuring-proxy-support.html#olm-inject-custom-ca_olm-configuring-proxy-support) so we can use it as the source of trust

```

2. Read the trusted CA ConfigMap data and use it to update the local trust store of Windows nodes during configuration.

> 3. Reconcile when the custom CA bundle changes. This will be done through a Kubernetes controller that watches

Reviewer 2: Do we only need to update it to the local Windows store or also need to patch the proxy/cluster object [ca-bundle-replacing_updating-ca-bundle](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/security/certificates/updating-ca-bundle.html#ca-bundle-replacing_updating-ca-bundle)?

Author: Patching the proxy/cluster object is a cluster admin task, if they want to change or add certs to their trusted CA bundle. 
It is one of the ways to start a reconcile workflow -- something WMCO reacts to rather than something something WMCO would do

- Adding the proxy’s trusted CA certificate bundle to Windows nodes' local trust store.

Since WMCO is a day 2 operator, it will pick up proxy settings during runtime regardless of if proxy settings were set
during cluster install time or at some point during the cluster's lifetime. When global proxy settings are updated, WMCO will react by:
- overriding proxy vars on the instance with the new values
- copying over the new trust bundle to Windows instances (old one should be removed) and updating each instance's local trust store

All changes detailed in this enhancement proposal will be limited to the Windows Machine Config Operator.

### User Stories

User stories can also be found within the node proxy epic: [WINC-802](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/WINC-802)

#### Story 1 - [WINC-637: Set cluster-wide proxy environment variables on Windows instance](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/WINC-637)

As an administrator of a network with strict traffic egress policies,
I want Windows nodes on my OpenShift cluster to successfully make proxied
external requests for images and other external service interactions.

> This includes updating proxy settings when the cluster-wide config changes.

Author: The focus is any traffic from the node including external requests from WMCO-managed Windows services. Workload config is out of scope i.e. the user's responsibility

[tier 3 OpenShift API](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/rest_api/understanding-api-support-tiers.html#api-tiers_understanding-api-tiers).

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A

#### Failure Modes

N/A

## Design Details

### Configuring Proxy Environment Variables

As it stands today, the source of truth for cluster-wide proxy settings is the `Proxy` resource with the name `cluster`.
The contents of the resource are both user-defined, as well as adjusted by the cluster network operator (CNO). Some
platforms require instances to access certain endpoints to retrieve metadata for bootstrapping. CNO has logic to inject
additional `no-proxy` entries such as `169.254.169.254` and `.${REGION}.compute.internal` into the `Proxy` resource.

OLM is a subscriber to these `Proxy` settings -- it forwards the settings to the CSV of managed operators, so the WMCO
container will automatically get the required `NO_PROXY`, `HTTP_PROXY`, and `HTTPS_PROXY` environment variables on startup.
In fact, OLM will update and restart the operator pod with proper environment variables if the `Proxy` resource changes.

> In proxy-enabled clusters, WMCO will store the 3 proxy variables and their values in the 

Author: > WMCO will take the proxy setting from its environment.

Yep you're right, I will call this out explicitly

In clusters without a global proxy, these variables will not be present in the services ConfigMap.
This will be done by adding a `EnvironmentVars` key to the top level of the services ConfigMap spec.
The new key will be an array of name-value pairs representing environment variables to be set on Windows instances.
```json
{
  "EnvironmentVars": [
    {
      "name": "name of the environment variable",
      "value": "value the variable should be set to on the instance"
    }
  ],
  "Services": "<existing spec>",
  "Files": "<existing spec>",
}
```

WICD, which uses the ConfigMap data to configure Windows services, will now have the added responsibility of ensuring
the `EnvironmentVars` are correctly set on the node and its managed services. WICD will check if any env vars changed by
comparing each variable's value on the node to the expected value in the ConfigMap. If there is a discrepancy:
- WICD will update the env vars through a [Windows syscall](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/sys/windows#SetEnvironmentVariable)
  which sets the environment variables system-wide, also known as the `Machine` level in Windows. 

>   There are 3 levels to Windows envrionment variables: `Machine`, `User`, and `Process`. `Process` inherits from 

Reviewer 3: nit:  envrionment->environment

  `User`, which inherits from the top level of `Machine`, and sub-processes inherit from their parent process. 
  In order to route all external node traffic through the proxy, we must set the proxy variables at the `Machine` level.
  This will also allow the required services (including kubelet and containerd) to inherit the desired values.
- WICD will reboot the instance so Windows services actually pick up the updated env var values from the OS registry.

### Configuring Custom Trusted Certificates

1. We will add a new ConfigMap to the WMCO's bundle manifests. This resource will contain a trusted CA injection request
   label so it will be updated by CNO when the global `Proxy` resource changes.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  annotations:

>     release.openshift.io/create-only: "true"

Reviewer 4: Won't this prevent the updates of this configmap with the changed trusted CA bundle contents coming from CNO?

Author: Thank you for pointing this out!

As far as I can tell no, it doesn't prevent updates. This is recommended by the [Operator Proxy Support Dev Workflow](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1otp9v5KkoOgq5vhN7ieBpdFhRIIy6z2yuaS_0rjm6wQ/edit#heading=h.dzcnuz4qv07o). It seems this annotation is used to tell CVO not to kick back changes to this resource (i.e. don't delete the CA data injected by CNO).

However, WMCO is managed by OLM, not CVO, and OLM doesn't provide a similar mechanism to ignore changes to manifests. I will update the design to account for this.

Reviewer 4: True, WMCO is OLM managed while this annotation is CVO based. I agree better to remove it to avoid confusion.

> and the registry does not update until a shutdown/startup cycle, this will require rebooting the instance.

Reviewer 5: > the registry does not update until a shutdown/startup cycle

This isn't true, the registry is updated when you update it. Whether or not the updated key will be used until reboot is situation dependent.

* [delete cert via powershell](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37228851/delete-certificate-from-computer-store)

---

### Test Plan & Infrastructure Needed

In addition to unit testing individual WMCO packages and controllers, an e2e job will be added to the release repo for
WMCO's master/release-4.14 branches. This can replace the current vSphere job to avoid growing the number of required jobs.

We create a new workflow to test on vSphere. The [individual steps](https://github.com/openshift/release/tree/master/ci-operator/step-registry/ipi/conf/vsphere/proxy/https)
are already present in the release repo and used by other jobs; we will string them together as needed to satisfy all
our testing requirements (OVN and HTTPS proxy secured by additional certs). The workflow will have the following steps:
```yaml
Pre:
- ipi-conf-vsphere
- ipi-conf-vsphere-proxy-https
- ovn-conf
- ovn-conf-hybrid-manifest-with-custom-vxlan-port
- ipi-install-vsphere
Test:
- windows-e2e-operator-test-with-custom-vxlan-port
Post:
- gather-network
- gather-proxy
- ipi-vsphere-post

> ```

Author: Alright I can move this info to the eng details of the relevant story

enhancement document for guidance.

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A. There will be no version skew since this work is all within 1 product sub-component (WMCO). The 8.y.z version of the
official Red Hat operator will not have cluster-wide egress proxy support for Windows enabled. Then, when customers move
to WMCO 9.0.0, the proxy support will be available.

## Implementation History

The implementation history can be tracked by following the associated work items in Jira and source code improvements in
the WMCO Github repo.

## Alternatives & Justification

### Design

* Another possible way for WMCO to retrieve the proxy variables is to watch the `rendered-worker` `MachineConfig` for
  changes and parse info from the `proxy.env` file. MCO re-renders this `MachineConfig` when CVO injects new proxy
  variables into its pod spec. The difficulty of this approach comes from figuring out when we need to update
  node's env vars. Ideally such reconfiguring happens only when the values change in the pod spec, but how can we detect

>   if the proxy env vars changed or the `rendered-worker` `MachineConfig` was updated some other reason? 

Reviewer 3: add 'for' 
'for some other reason'

  vars are injected and updated by OLM. The difficulty of this approach comes from figuring out when we need to update
  node's env vars. Ideally such reconfiguring happens only when the values change in the pod spec, but how can we detect
  if the proxy env vars changed or the operator just restarted for some other reason? We want to avoid kicking off
  reconfigurations of all nodes every time the operator restarts.
* In order to avoid a system reboot after setting node environment variables, we can reconcile services by setting their process-level
  environment variables, and then restarting the services. These changes are ephemeral though, if the instance reboots. Either:
  * For each service
    ```powershell
    [string[]] $envVars = @("HTTP_PROXY=", "NO_PROXY=123.example.com,10.88.0.0/16")
    Set-ItemProperty HKLM:SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\<$SERVICE_NAME> -Name Environment -Value $envVars
    Restart-Service <$SERVICE_NAME>
    ```
  * For the Powershell session
    ```powershell
    $Env:HTTP_PROXY = "http://<username>:<pswd>@<ip>:<port>"
    $Env:NO_PROXY = "123.example.com,10.88.0.0/16"
    # then restart all WMCO-managed services

>     ```

Reviewer 5: Not rebooting is ideal. Should the variables be added to services-configmap? Or in separate secret which can be accessed by WICD? This seems appropriate as it directly relates to service configuration.
This way they will always be used, reboot or not.

behavior of Windows nodes/workloads in proxied clusters, and comfortable spinning up their own proxied clusters.

### API Extensions

N/A, as no CRDs, admission and conversion webhooks, aggregated API servers, or finalizers will be added or modified.
Only the WMCO will be extended which is an optional operator with its own lifecycle and SLO/SLAs, a 
[tier 3 OpenShift API](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/rest_api/understanding-api-support-tiers.html#api-tiers_understanding-api-tiers).

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A

#### Failure Modes & Support Procedures

In general the support procedures for WMCO will remain the same. There are two underlying mechanisms we rely on, the
publishing of proxy config to cluster resources and the comsuming of the published config. If either of the underlying
mechanisms fail, Windows nodes will become proxy unaware. This could involve an issue with the user-provided proxy
settings, the cluster network operator, OLM, or WMCO. This would result in all future egress traffic circumventing the
proxy, which could affect inter-pod communication, existing application availablity, and security. Also, the pause image

> may not be able to be fetched, preventing new Windows nodes from being bootstrapped. This would require manual

Reviewer: Is the pause image pulled required during bootstrapping? I thought it happens when the first Pod is deployed.

Author: You're right. I will edit this

The motivation here is to expand the Windows containers production use case, enabling users to add Windows nodes and run
workloads easily and successfully in a proxied cluster. This is an extremely important ask for customer environments
where Windows nodes are often tasked with pulling images private registries secured behind the client's proxy server, or

> making requests to off-cluster services, and those that use a [custom public key infrastructure](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/networking/configuring-a-custom-pki.html).

Reviewer: Nit: move `custom public key infrastructure`  to the next line,

### Goals

* Create an automated mechanism for WMCO to consume global egress proxy config from existing platform recources.
  Includes:
  + [proxy connection information](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12//rest_api/config_apis/proxy-config-openshift-io-v1.html#spec)
    * http/https URLs
    + list of networks that should bypass the proxy (no-proxy hostnames, domains, IP addresses or other network CIDRs)
  + [additional certificate authorities](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12//rest_api/config_apis/proxy-config-openshift-io-v1.html#spec-trustedca) required to validate the proxy's certificate
* Configure the proxy settings in WMCO-managed components on Windows nodes (kubelet, containerd runtime)
* React to changes to the cluster-wide proxy settings during cluster runtime
* Maintain normal functionality in non-proxied clusters

### Non-Goals

* First-class support/enablement of proxy utilization for user-provided applications

> * Anything to do with *ingress* or reverse proxy settings is out of scope

Reviewer: Please remove `Anything to do with`

This will be done by adding a `EnvironmentVars` key to the top level of the services ConfigMap spec.
The new key will be an array of name-value pairs representing environment variables to be set on Windows instances.
```
{
  "EnvironmentVars": [
    {
      "name": "name of the environment variable",
      "value": "value the variable should be set to on the instance"
    }
  ],
  "Services": ...,
  "Files": ...,
}
```

WICD, which uses the ConfigMap data to configure Windows services, will now have the added responsibility of ensuring
the `EnvironmentVars` are correctly set for its managed services. WICD will check if any env vars changed by
comparing each variable's value on the node to the expected value in the ConfigMap. If there is a discrepancy:
- WICD will update the env vars if needed, either through a
[Windows syscall](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/sys/windows#SetEnvironmentVariable) or a Powershell command:
```powershell
$Env:HTTP_PROXY = "http://<username>:<pswd>@<ip>:<port>"
$Env:NO_PROXY = "123.example.com,10.88.0.0/16"
```
- WICD will restart each service in the ConfigMap's `Services` list so they pick up the changes

### Configuring Custom Trusted Certificates

> 1. We will add a new resource to WMCO's bundle manifests. This ConfigMap will contain a trusted CA injection request

Reviewer: Nit:
```suggestion
We will add a new ConfigMap to the WMCO's bundle manifests. This resource will contain a trusted CA injection request
```

container will automatically get the required `NO_PROXY`, `HTTP_PROXY`, and `HTTPS_PROXY` environment variables on startup.
In fact, OLM will update and restart the operator pod with proper environment variables if the `Proxy` resource changes.

> WMCO the store the 3 proxy variables and their values in the `windows-services` ConfigMap.

Reviewer 5: `WMCO the store`
will store?

This will be done by adding a `EnvironmentVars` key to the services ConfigMap spec.
The new key will be a list of name-value pairs representing environment variables to be set on Windows instances:
```json
[
  {
    "name": "name of the environment variable",
    "value": "value the variable should be set to on the instance"
  }

> ]

Reviewer 5: Please include where in the schema this array will go.

Author: > Don't you need to indicate this is an array of environment variables?

I thought I made it clear in the text and in the json schema

```

WICD, which uses the ConfigMap data to configure Windows services, will now have the added responsibility to ensure the

> proper setting of these `EnvironmentVars` variables on the instance. 

Reviewer 5: setting the variables on the instance -> ensuring the variables are correctly set for the service

1. WICD will check if any env vars changed by comparing each variable's value on the node to the expected value in the
   ConfigMap. If there is a discrepancy:
  - WICD will update the env vars if needed, e.g.
    ```powershell
    $Env:HTTP_PROXY = "http://<username>:<pswd>@<ip>:<port>"
    $Env:NO_PROXY = "123.example.com,10.88.0.0/16"

>     ```

Author: > This solution isn't specific to a service, what if a service and another service need different values for same variable?

@sebsoto There is already a solution to this. The `EnvironmentVars` will be the default, but if a specific service wants to override them, it can set it's own by providing a powershell prescript `Set-ItemProperty ...`

> add support to WICD to execute PowerShell scripts independent of a service

I don't think we need to introduce this. The sys/windows package does have a call to set env vars so it should be simple. WICD can already run powershell directly on the host anyway.

>     ```

Reviewer 5: How does this solve the reboot issue if you are not applying the environment variables to the service's themselves, and you are instead setting them for the powershell environment?

>     ```

Reviewer 5: Also, a powershell pre-script isn't going to work if its executed before the service is created.

>     ```

Reviewer: >WICD can already run powershell directly on the host anyway.

Only in the context of a service. At some point we might need to introduce running of PowerShell scripts that has nothing to do with a service and was wondering if we need to do that in this case.

  - WICD will restart each service in the ConfigMap's `Services` list so they pick up the changes

### Configuring Custom Trusted Certificates

> 1. We will add a new resource WMCO's manifests. This ConfigMap will contain a trusted CA injection request label so it

Author: What I mean here is add the new `trusted-ca` ConfigMap as part of the operator [`manifests/`](https://github.com/openshift/windows-machine-config-operator/tree/master/bundle/manifests)

config is re-rendered by MCO (for whom proxy info is injected by CVO) to include a systemd unit 
`EnvironmentFile=/etc/mco/proxy.env`, with proxy vars set in this file.

WMCO will retrieve the proxy variables by watching the `rendered-worker` `MachineConfig` for changes and parse info from
the `proxy.env` file. This could be an expensive operation, but since we already parse ignition from the `MachineConfig`
as part of node bootstrap, the technical cost and complexity is reduced.

Then, once it has the required values, the operator will set the 3 proxy environment variables on the Windows instance
during node configuration/reconciling through Powershell. Since Windows services read environment from the system 

> registry and the registry does not update until a shutdown/startup cycle, this may require rebooting. 

Reviewer: This may or this requires rebooting? We have to be specific here.

2. Read the trusted CA ConfigMap data and use it to update the local trust store of Windows nodes during configuration.

3. Reconcile when the custom CA bundle changes. This will be done through a Kubernetes controller that watches
   the `trusted-ca` ConfigMap for create/update/delete events. On change, copy the new trust bundle to Windows instances,
   deleting old certificates (i.e. not present in the current trust bundle) off the instance and importing new ones.

How-to references:
* [import cert via powershell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/pki/import-certificate?view=windowsserver2019-ps)
* [delete cert via powershell](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37228851/delete-certificate-from-computer-store)

---

### Test Plan & Infrastructure Needed

In addition to unit testing individual WMCO packages and controllers, an e2e job will be added to the release repo for

> WMCO's master/release-4.14 branches. This can replace the current vSphere job to avoid growing the number of required jobs.

Reviewer: vSphere is the number 1 platform for Windows nodes. I suggest not replacing this. Or do you think the vSphere platform:none job covers that?

Author: I will let @openshift/openshift-team-windows-containers weigh in here

We create a new workflow to test on vSphere. The [indivudial steps](https://github.com/openshift/release/tree/master/ci-operator/step-registry/ipi/conf/vsphere/proxy/https) 
are already present in the release repo and used by other jobs; we will string them together as needed to satisfy all
our testing requirements (OVN and HTTPS proxy secured by additional certs). The workflow will have the following steps:
```yaml
Pre:
- ipi-conf-vsphere
- ipi-conf-vsphere-proxy-https
- ovn-conf
- ovn-conf-hybrid-manifest-with-custom-vxlan-port
- ipi-install-vsphere
Test:
- windows-e2e-operator-test-with-custom-vxlan-port
Post:
- gather-network
- gather-proxy
- ipi-vsphere-post
```

> We will run regression testing to make sure the addition of the egress proxy feature does not break existing functionality.

Reviewer: We or QE? I would replace the `We` with `Existing e2e tests will ensure the addition...`

When we release a community  offering with this feature, we will add a similar CI job using a cluster-wide proxy on OKD.
QE may want to cover all platforms though when validating this feature.

### Graduation Criteria

A community version of WMCO 8 or 9 will be released with incremental additions to Windows proxy support
functionality, giving users an opportunity to get an early preview of the feature using OKD/OCP 4.13 or 4.14.
It will also allow us to collect feedback to troubleshoot common pain points and learn if there are any shortcomings.

The feature associated with this enhacement is targeted to land in the offical Red Hat operator version of WMCO 9.0.0
within OpenShift 4.14 timeframe. The normal WMCO release process will be followed as the functionality described in this

> enhancement is integrated into the product.

Reviewer: I suggest saying this first and then mention the community version.

### Test Plan & Infrastructure Needed

In addition to unit testing individual WMCO packages and controllers, an e2e job will be added to the release repo for
WMCO's master/release-4.14 branches. A new CI workflow will be created using 
[existing step-registry steps](https://github.com/openshift/release/tree/master/ci-operator/step-registry/ipi/conf/vsphere/proxy/https),
which creates a vSphere cluster with hybrid-overlay networking and an HTTPS proxy secured by additional certs. 
This workflow will be used to run the existing WMCO e2e test suite to ensure the addition of the egress proxy feature 
does not break existing functionality. We will add a few test cases to explicitly check the state of proxy settings on Windows
nodes. When we release a community offering with this feature, we will add a similar CI job using a cluster-wide proxy on OKD.

> QE may want to cover all platforms when validating this feature.

Reviewer: QE should validate all platforms. That is not optional.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

The relevant upgrade path is from WMCO 8.y.z in OCP 4.13 to WMCO 9.y.z in OCP 4.14. There will be no changes to the

> current WMCO upgrade strategy. Once customers are on WMCO 9.0.0, they can configure one and the Windows nodes will be

Reviewer: `they can configure one`?

The implementation history can be tracked by following the associated work items in Jira and source code improvements in
the WMCO Github repo.

## Alternatives & Justification

* A workaround that would deliver the same value proposed by this enhancement would be to validate and provide guidance
  to make cluster administrators responsible for manually propogating proxy settings to each of their Windows nodes, and
  underlying OpenShift managed components. This is not a feasible alternative as even manual node changes can be
  ephemeral. WMCO would reset config changes to OpenShift managed Windows services in the event of a node reconcilition.

> * There is another possible way for WMCO to [retrieve the proxy variables](#configuring-proxy-environment-variables). WMCO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another possible way for WMCO to retrieve the proxy variable is to read them from its own pod spec...
```

  can read the environment variables from its own pod spec (vars are injected + updated by OLM). The difficulty of this
  approach comes from figuring out when we need to update node's env vars. Ideally such reconfiguring happens only when
  the values change in the pod spec, but how can we detect if the proxy env vars changed or the operator just restarted 
  for some other reason? We want to avoid kicking off reconfigurations of all nodes every time the operator restarts.
* In order to avoid a system reboot after setting node environment variables, we can reconcile services by setting their
  environment variables, and then restarting the services. These changes are ephemeral, though, if the instance reboots.
  ```powershell
  [string[]] $envVars = @("HTTP_PROXY=http://<username>:<pswd>@<ip>:<port>", "NO_PROXY=123.example.com,10.88.0.0/16")
  Set-ItemProperty HKLM:SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\<$SERVICE_NAME> -Name Environment -Value $envVars
  Restart-Service <$SERVICE_NAME>
  ```
* Also note that there is another way to get the [trusted CA data](#configuring-custom-trusted-certififactes) required

>   rather than accessing the ConfigMap directly, but I prefer not to follow it. It leaves open the same concern about

Reviewer: I suggest saying `but it leaves open the same concern...` taking individual preference out of the statement and just stating why.

  unnecessary reconciliations -- how to detect if the operator restart was due to a trust bundle file change or the pod

>   just restarted for another reason? For completeness, I will list it out the apporach here.

Reviewer: `For completeness, the approach is listed out here:`

  * Update the operator’s Deployment to support trusted CA injection by mounting the trusted CA ConfigMap
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: apps/v1
  kind: Deployment
  metadata:
    name: windows-machine-config-operator
    namespace: openshift-windows-machine-config-operator
    annotations:
      config.openshift.io/inject-proxy: windows-machine-config-operator
  spec:
      ...
        containers:
          - name: windows-machine-config-operator
            volumeMounts:
            - name: trusted-ca
              mountPath: /etc/pki/ca-trust/extracted/pem
              readOnly: true
        - name: trusted-ca
          configMap:
            name: trusted-ca
            items:
              - key: ca-bundle.crt
                path: tls-ca-bundle.pem
  ...
  ```
  * Create a file watcher that watches changes to the mounted trust bundle that kills the main operator process and
    allows the backing k8s Deployment to start a new Pod that mounts the updated trust bundle. 
    Implementation example: [cluster-ingress-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/334)

> * Instead of adding a new vSphere job, we can leverage an [existing proxy test workflow on AWS](https://steps.ci.openshift.org/workflow/openshift-e2e-aws-proxy).

Reviewer: Please preface this with a testing alternative sub-heading as this is not a design alternative.
